---
title: "Mary and the Meta-Problem"
date: "2021-07-16"
preview: "Mary, of the famed ‘Knowledge Argument' does indeed acquire new knowledge upon seeing red for the first time. However, this fact does not, as is generally assumed, undermine physicalism. At least it need not. What it does undermine, definitively, is objectivism: the notion that everything, from quarks to quacks, can be understood by way of objective description."
category: philosophy
---

Mary, of the famed <a href="https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qualia-knowledge/">‘Knowledge Argument’</a> (Jackson, 1982), does indeed acquire new knowledge upon seeing red for the first time. However, this fact does not, as is generally assumed, undermine physicalism. At least it need not. What it does undermine, definitively, is objectivism: the notion that everything, from quarks to quacks, can be understood by way of objective description. The world, it seems, contains both objective and subjective dimensions, and thus any intelligible conception of things must, by necessity, include both. Although the case of Mary does not subvert physicalism, as a metaphysical paradigm, it does demonstrate the absurdity of a worldview that fails to account for subjective experience aka ‘qualia’. To be clear, physicalism may ultimately hold. It might, in the end, just so happen that it’s physical “all the way down”. Yet even if such were the case, and I’m agnostic, without the inclusion of phenomenal experience and phenomenal concepts, the study of mind would be nothing but the study of the brain. An interesting object, to be sure, and certainly essential to mind, but it is not the mind, for the mind is fundamentally distinct (if not ontologically, certainly epistemologically). A study of the mind without qualia is thus no study of mind at all. It is, if it takes the brain as its sole object, a neuroscience devoid of meaning. If it takes behaviour as its object of inquiry, then it is behaviourism, a scientistic dead-end. If what we desire is a bona fide “science of mind”, we must embrace the phenomenal, wed the objective with the subjective, the brain with behaviour and qualia. To this end, we must embrace the concept explanatory pluralism.

Mary’s experience of red constitutes knowledge of a kind. It is knowledge of a phenomenological kind; specifically, knowledge of what it is like to see red. Despite her lifetime of colour scholarship, Mary’s experience of red - and the kind of fact it represents - is entirely non-derivable, I argue, from any objective, physical description of colour and colour perception. Indeed her experience of red is epistemically distinct from such knowledge, a class of knowledge that can only be acquired by way of experience. It is a fact about the world from the inside, as it were, a subjective fact that cannot be inferred from the physical properties of colour or the human visual system and its myriad machinery. It must be seen to be known, so to speak. This fact, however, does not imply that there is such things as “non-physical” stuff and that, by extension, physicalism must be false. Physicalism can hold, if we want it to, even in the face of qualia.

Philosophers, such as Lewis and Dennett (1983, 1991), reject the notion that Mary has acquired new knowledge. However, they do so from different angles. Lewis, for instance, claims that Mary hasn’t acquired new knowledge, merely new abilities; namely, the ability to imagine, recall and recognise certain colours and colour experiences. He argues for this point, primarily, on the basis of it being more parsimonious than the alternative, the “Hypothesis of Phenomenal Information” (HPI). Where his hypothesis, the “Abilities Hypothesis” (AH), leaves physicalism in tact, HPI, he believes, does not (1983, p132). Thus, all things equal, we should prefer AH. Dennett (1991) takes a different, far bolder line. He claims that Mary doesn’t acquire new knowledge upon seeing red for the first time, for it’s not the first time she’s seen red. Indeed, according to Dennett, Mary has already, on the basis of her physical understanding of colour and colour perception, inferred the experience of red before leaving the room. She has derived, as it were, the experience of red from its physical description.

While Dennett’s claim is prima facie absurd, it is in fact, I suggest, the stronger of the two arguments. Of course we find the notion of inferring experience from physical knowledge patently ridiculous, for we are mere apes, incapable of fathoming the cognitive potential of an entity such as Mary. She is, for all intents and purposes, a fundamentally different kind of intelligence. We should not, therefore, dismiss this claim solely on the basis that we find it hard to believe, that it doesn’t mesh with our intuitions. This is roughly the argument made by Dennett, and he makes it well. But for those sympathetic to the “hard problem” (Chalmers, 2002), as I am, it’s unconvincing nevertheless. What Dennett (arguably) demonstrates, with “Mary and the Blue Banana”, is that there might, in principle, exist such intelligences that are capable of deriving phenomenal experience from abstract representations of them. He does not, however, demonstrate that they are one and the same.

The Knowledge Argument, the way I see it, is less about whether or not experience may, in principle, be deduced from objective language, than it is a way of elucidating that experience represents knowledge above and beyond the physical description. Though it’s highly implausible, the physical description of a certain class of phenomena may, given extraordinary powers of mind, lead to the experience of said phenomena. While our intuitions may not be equipped to comprehend such a feat of deductive imagination, that doesn’t mean such a feat isn’t logically possible. But conversely, if we can imagine an entity capable of getting from a physical description to b phenomenological fact, that only implies that such a feat is logically possible - i.e. that there is a logically possible world wherein Mary can derive b from a. It does not, however, imply that such a feat is nomologically possible - that such a feat is possible in our world, under our laws of physics. And so it is here that Dennett misses the point. The point is not that Mary can, in some logically possible world, derive the experience of red from its physical description. Rather it is simply that the experience of red is an entirely distinct piece of knowledge (physical or otherwise), additional to - rather than synonymous with or identical to - the physical description. The physical description and the experience are ‘separate epistemological objects’, so to speak. In other words, if one has “all the relevant physical knowledge” re the experience and yet still lacks the experience, then they really are missing something. That we can imagine a mind - if we indeed can - capable of inferring an experience from a third-person, objective account, doesn’t change the fact: there remains a first-person dimension to the world that a physical description, in the absence of a mind capable of bridging the gap, fundamentally fails to capture. Thus third-person accounts of the world, in the absence of a first-person perspective, renders the world woefully incomplete.

As for Lewis’ Abilities Hypothesis, though reasonable enough on its face, it ultimately rests upon an epistemological distinction - knowledge vs abilities - that is neither warranted nor necessary. It’s unwarranted in that there appears no meaningful divide between knowledge, of the sort Lewis accepts, and the “abilities” Mary purportedly acquires upon experiencing red. In the case of both knowledge - of the conventional variety - and Lewis’ abilities, there are logical objects “in the head” that map onto facts about the world. While the former have to do with facts about what the world is like “from nowhere”, the latter pertains to facts about the world “from a particular point of view” (Nagel). Both perspectives amount to knowledge and both are necessary if we are to accurately comprehend the world.

The abilities/knowledge distinction is also unnecessary in that it isn’t required to save physicalism. Indeed we can concede that Mary acquires new knowledge upon leaving the room, and simply reject the claim that this knowledge amounts to “non-physical” knowledge. We could, in this vein, claim that the Knowledge Argument is a non-starter. If we hold the experience of knowledge to be physical, as with the rest of knowledge, then by definition Mary doesn’t possess all the physical knowledge prior to her experience of red. Where prior to leaving the room Mary had all the relevant facts concerning the “structure and dynamics”, what she lacked, we might reason, was knowledge concerning its “intrinsic nature” (Chalmers, X). While objective descriptions of phenomena concern their structure and dynamics, they do not tell us about their intrinsic nature. Perhaps experience does. This concession does not necessarily subvert physicalism, but it does require some rethinking just what exactly we mean by “physical”. At the very least, the subjective perspective requires that we accept that experience is an emergent, if not intrinsic, property of matter. The Abilities Hypothesis does not allow us to circumvent this fact of the matter. Thus there is no real epistemic utility to it, as Lewis supposed.

It is a fact, albeit a philosophically inconvenient one, that the mind exhibits, in addition to a physical dimension, an experiential dimension which cannot be fully captured by a purely objective description of the way things are. Understanding the mind requires, as Chalmers puts it, an integration of third-person data - i.e. data pertaining behaviour and brain function - and first-person data - data pertaining to subjective experience. Without admitting phenomenal experience into our study of the mind, we are without what is often the most powerful level of explanation. Moreover, we lose makes a study of the mind interesting in the first place: better understanding the “material” of our minds. If we are serious about a science of mind, then we must, by necessity, take qualia seriously. We must embrace multiple levels of description, multiple levels of explanation. We must embrace, in the jargon, ‘explanatory pluralism’.
