---
title: "Where Is The Mind?"
subtitle: "Demarcating Cognition"
date: "2021-10-16"
category: "Philosophy"
preview: "On the contemporary cognitive science construal of things, the mind is - in the most basic sense - the brain. And what the brain is, on this view, is something like a computer performing manipulations on abstract symbols below the level of our awareness, that amount..."
---

On the contemporary cognitive science construal of things, the mind is - in the most basic sense - the brain. And what the brain is, on this view, is something like a computer performing manipulations on abstract symbols below the level of our awareness, that amount - in our field of consciousness - to something like representations of the world. The mind, through the cognitive science prism, is thus a kind of mirror of the world, reflecting the reality beyond our minds, however imperfectly. There is, however, a growing dissatisfaction with this “brain-centric” model of our minds; a dissatisfaction borne both of empirical findings and philosophical perspective. According to this increasingly popular movement, cognition extends beyond the brain. Indeed on this particular construal, which really amounts to a collection of perspectives ranging in their level of contrarianism, cognition is better thought of as a dynamical process involving brain, body and the world. This “collection of perspectives”, for the sake of convenience, we can think of, in the aggregate, as the ‘situated cognition’ movement.

The situated cognition movement has a lot going for it. The mind, from a variety of standpoints, does indeed amount to more than mere brain processes. While cognitive science has so-far proven a fruitful intellectual program, the line it’s drawn around the brain amounts, in the end, to an arbitrary - if indeed pragmatic - one, more than it represents any genuine ontological line in the sand between the cognisant and non-cognisant worlds. Although the brain is definitively integral to cognition - a necessary condition, perhaps - it is not sufficient for understanding the mechanics that give rise to it, the myriad biophysical laws by which it operates. To “truly understand” the mind and its workings, we must embrace a broader - that is, “situated” - perspective of its nature. We must, in other words, put the brain, body and world back together again. What this means, however, as a pragmatic scientific paradigm - and just how far it departs from the present methodological reality of cognitive science - is somewhat less clear.

Many cognitive acts are clearly reliant upon features of our bodies. Perhaps the quintessential example of the relationship between our bodies and minds, in particular, is the act of counting with our hands. In using our ten fingers as a kind of abacus, we are in effect augmenting a computation that we would otherwise perform purely “in our heads”. That is, we are extending the act of cognition beyond our brains and into the world, through the use of our body. This is an example of what’s known as “embodied cognition”, the view that the body is often - if not always - essential to how we cognise. Other such examples abound, including the role affect plays in cognition, and the ways in which our bodies, as spatio-temporal objects, inform how we construct concepts. At the most basic level, there’s also just the obvious fact that our brains are not distinct objects, separate to or from our bodies, but rather components of them; they are embodied, in other words, within the context of the entire physiological system that comprises our organism. Much of the recent work on the relation between the gut and the brain makes this point well. So what does this actually mean? Well, what the embodied perspective gives us, at the highest level, is an interactionist picture of the brain and body, one replete with complex, organism-wide causal dynamics. Where the cognitivist view of mind paints the brain as a “mirror of the world”, the embodied perspective, taken to the extreme, paints the brain instead as a kind of “mirror of the body”.

There are also ways in which our broader social and cultural environments can be viewed as constituent elements of our cognition. Consider writing systems or mathematical notation. Without their existence, innumerable cognitive tasks - most of which we take for granted - wouldn’t be possible. Moreover, many of our tools and technologies, most notably computers, are clear extensions and amplifiers of our cognition, things which make us better cognitive agents. In this sense, cognition is “embedded”; that is, inexorably woven into the fabric of our environments.

The most seemingly radical of the situated perspectives is the “extended mind” theory. The theory/hypothesis is grounded in the idea that the skull and indeed our entire physical organism is ultimately an arbitrary boundary we draw around cognition. The environment, on this view, is not only a cognitive-aid ala the embedded theory, but is itself the mind - an “extension” of it. The basic argument at the heart of the extended mind theory is that many of the augmentative features of our environment, were they to perform their role inside our heads, we would without hesitation label them aspects or features of mind. The only reason we don’t count such features as truly or inherently cognitive is because they don’t live inside our heads. According to extended mind proponents, this is perfunctory and wrong-headed - cognitively chauvinistic, as it were. If we would have no problem ascribing cognitive power to any given object/process were it to exist within our skulls, we should do the same even if such objects/processes exist outside of them. This is known as the “parity principle”.

Undoubtedly, there is a complex relationship between the brain, body and world, that together, comprises what we consider cognition. But if we expand our conception of cognition to include the body and the world, how should we, then, distinguish between cognitive and non-cognitive systems/objects? If the brain is indeed an arbitrary point of demarcation, where then is the line for real?

A thing is functionally/operationally cognitive, I suggest, if we could not understand the behaviour of a cognitive system - to which that thing is related - without specific reference to that thing. This is, admittedly, a wide net, but there seems no principled reason to cast the net any other way. In fairness to cognitive science, this is mostly a point of epistemology, however. For as a matter of prudent scientific practice, we must go after the things/objects/entities that provide us with the most explanatory power, in terms of the functioning of the cognitive system of which they form part. Even if one concedes the strongest claim made by situated advocates, that the brain does not represent the world but rather enacts it, together with the world - that we “call forth” our lived-worlds - this pragmatic fact of the matter remains. Even if cognition is the ultimate relational process, interconnected to the extreme, there will always be nodes - as in any given network - doing more more work than others. In this respect, the focus of cognitive science on the brain is well-justified. The brain, it seems defensible, is in fact the most leveraged point of scientific investigation, the most cognitively potent. That is just to say we are better off targeting our scientific efforts towards the processes of the brain, than we are the physiology of our feet, for instance - even if our feet are, in some capacity, serving a cognitive function. In the same vein, the emphasis we place on the individual, as units of cognition, is pragmatically useful, if not conceptually enlightened. There may not be, in the end, such things as individuals, however, operationally it makes sense to treat the world as if there were.

So while cognitive science, as an enterprise, is perhaps unduly wedded to the brain-as-mind idea, as a conceptual notion, as a matter of methodology, cognitive science already takes the body and the world, as elements of cognition, rather seriously. The brain is not, as is widely argued by advocates of situated cognition, studied in a vacuum. On the contrary, it is studied with the body and world firmly in view. We study the brain in relation to behaviour, and we study behaviour in relation to the world. Thus just how different an embodied or embedded or extended or enacted - choose your “e” - brand of cognitive science would actually look, in practice, beyond the philosophical gloss, is highly unclear.
