---
title: "Why's Knowledge So Hard?"
date: "2023-10-16"
category: "Philosophy"
preview: "More than two millennia has passed since Plato’s Theaetetus, the West's seminal work of epistemology, and yet the problem of knowledge remains precisely thus: a problem. Since antiquity, we’ve largely failed to make any real objective progress...."
---

More than two millennia has passed since Plato’s Theaetetus, the West's seminal work of epistemology, and yet the problem of knowledge remains precisely thus: a problem. Since antiquity, we’ve largely failed to make any real objective progress - as measured in terms of convergence on a single answer - towards resolving the philosophical problem of knowledge. The natural question to ask, it seems, is Why? Why, that is, the problem of knowledge is at all a problem (let alone such a problem). Since the fundamental nature of knowledge appears to be impenetrable, at least by human reason, perhaps we ought to limit our epistemological inquiry to more modest questions. For while it seems highly possible that we shall never come to grips with knowledge, in the ultimate sense, perhaps we might console ourselves - if not fully - by coming to grips with why. More ambitiously, perhaps in attempting to ascertain why knowledge is so hard to pin down, philosophically, we might accidentally clarify the issue. That way, at some distant point in the future, our descendants - much more intelligent apes, one hopes, than we - might happen to resolve the dilemma once and for all. Let this, then, be the intention of this here inquiry: to better understand why we don’t know what we don’t know. To know, if it’s indeed possible, why we don’t know how we know.

Philosophy, at least among laypeople, has a reputation for taking the most commonplace objects of experience and making mysteries of them. The entire field of epistemology is, among other things, a most powerful affirmation of this perception. What could be more self-evident, indeed more banal, than the fact of knowledge? Knowledge, of course, is that stuff that lives in our heads (in all of our heads, if not in equal amounts). Knowledge is how we know things. Duh. It’s what enables us to tie our shoes, predict the orbits of the planets, or recite the value of pi to 31 trillion digits. Why, then, if it’s so obvious, so evidently non-mysterious, does it so cause us to fall over ourselves in our attempt to discern its underlying Reality?

The basic problem of epistemology is, of course, the nature of knowledge. As in, what is it? And how do we come to possess it? If, that is, we do indeed ever happen to possess it at all. At some conventional level, we can answer these questions with very little problem. There is a world, and we come to know about it through the various sense organs. We perceive the world, in other words, and through the act of perception, we acquire knowledge about said world. Knowledge, it could be said, is the correspondence between facts we hold in mind, as subjects, and the way the world actually is, as an object. Moreover, the existence of knowledge could be substantiated, if we were pressed to do so, by our ability to make predictions. What could it be other than knowledge that allows us to predict the result, for instance, of mixing sugar with sulphuric acid, or the mass of an electron? Our ability to do stuff in the world, stuff that other people cannot, is the existence proof of knowledge, so to speak. One cannot ride a bike or solve the Dirac equation without the requisite knowledge. One can, however, with it. That’s the “cash-value” of knowledge, so to speak. Whether you believe in its ontological status as a real thing or not, it works. And that’s what matters (mostly).

That knowledge appears to work isn’t all the matters, of course. As curious creatures who seek to understand the world, we desire to understand phenomena as fully as possible. To this end, knowledge has so far eluded our grasp. While we can make sense of it conventionally, knowledge - when we get down to it - is rife with paradox and mystery. Take for instance mathematical knowledge. If all knowledge comes from the senses, from our perceiving the world, how is it possible that we come to apprehend mathematical “truths”? After all, mathematics consists of axioms that are seemingly true unto themselves - they’re not correspondent with any particular configuration of the world, nor do they appear borne directly of it. One plus one equals two irrespective of the laws of physics, and thus we need not any sense data in order to validate the claim. Indeed the truths of mathematics would seem to exist even if the world itself did not.

The existence of this kind of knowledge, so-named “a-priori” knowledge, suggests that we don’t so much acquire such truths from the world so much as we discover them. From some kind of Platonic realm, one might feel themselves inclined to reason, a realm of pure Form. Now here the dilemma has begun to rear its head. For in attempting to reconcile the apparent existence of knowledge with the way the world seems to be, we’ve been compelled to posit the existence of no less than an additional, transcendent plane of Reality. Of course not all philosophers are Platonists or transcendentalists of any other variety. However, the fact that some of the greatest minds who’ve reckoned with the question of knowledge have felt the need to resort to such grandiose postulations - such as the existence of alternate dimensions - should at least give one a sense of the size of things. Knowledge, like all things when viewed close enough, becomes alien - something foreign, indeed unknown.

Knowledge is hard, philosophically, because it forces us to reckon with the fundamental nature of our minds, the world, and the relationship between them. On an honest day, any good philosopher would concede that we don’t really know what our minds are, nor what the world is, nor - by extension - the precise status of the relationship between the two. It should come as no surprise, therefore, that we can’t readily ascertain the ‘truth of knowledge’, as it were, for doing so requires triangulating between three things we haven’t the slightest - ultimate - clue as to. In the same vein as the question, What is Reality? appears unlikely to give rise to any kind of ultimate answer - the kind of answer that would satisfy a majority of philosophers - the question, What is knowledge? seems like it will, in the end, prove similarly unassailable.

Two of the more popular approaches to knowledge - pragmatism and skepticism/relativism - reveal the difficulty inherent to the epistemological enterprise. Pragmatism, arguably the first definitively American philosophy, seeks to resolve the problem of knowledge by creating a quasi-objective, utilitarian standard against which to measure it. According to the pragmatists, the truth value of any given belief or idea is to be determined by its utility. That is, how efficacious it is at helping us realise our objectives, whatever they happen to be. Red is red, within the pragmatist paradigm, so long as believing such helps us realise that which we desire. If believing a thing is red serves some end, then it is true to that degree. Again, that’s its “cash-value”.

While the original pragmatists are to be credited for their ambition and ingenuity, their solution to the problem of epistemology is, on the whole, rather underwhelming. While its often hailed as a bona fide “theory of truth” it is more a “theory of the value of truth”, or rather, a “theory of what we generally mean by truth”. Rather than shedding light on what truth or knowledge is, fundamentally, pragmatism proffers a parochial - and indeed, identifiably American - perspective. It doesn’t so much provide an ultimate theory of knowledge, what it is or how we acquire it, as much as it simply encourages us to settle for a lesser, albeit highly practical notion of truth and how we might measure it. _Of course the assumption here, the assumption that a pragmatist would seek to challenge, is that there is more to truth than beliefs or ideas that serve a purpose._[ Could possibly turn into a footnote and make a point to say that defending this assumption is beyond the scope of the essay. ]

The skeptic, on the other hand, seeks to reconcile the problem of knowledge by dissolving it entirely. He/she/they will claim that there is no such thing as capital-K knowledge. To the degree that there is knowledge at all, it’s with a small k. Knowledge, according to the skeptic (a certain variety of skeptic, at least), is merely a convention, something we agree upon. It is subjective/intersubjective. While there are many flavours of epistemic skepticism, most would have it that knowledge is relative, culturally contingent, contextual. Knowledge, on this construal, is, in some basic sense, whatever we deem it to be.

The problem with this, however, is that’s simply too high a price to pay for a solution. Not only does it undermine one of the central philosophical pillars of society - that is, the notion of an objective, underlying truth - it also violates what is among our most deeply felt human intuitions. Neither of these problems, however, are legitimate grounds for denying the claims of skeptics. Though what does provide grounds for objection is how skeptical claims are, by their very nature, self-defeating. How can one simultaneously claim p that there is no such thing as “Truth”, while also asserting q that proposition p is True? The skeptic, try though they invariably do, cannot have it both ways. If there is no Truth, there is no means by which we could assert the fact without contradiction; without, in other words, providing its existence proof.

If attempts to demonstrate/justify the existence of knowledge as we “know” it, have largely failed to satisfy the standards of philosophical proof, and if attempts to dissolve or reformulate the concept of knowledge have been similarly underwhelming, as I suggest they have, then the question begs, Just what are we to do? If we can’t prove, to our logical satisfaction, the existence of knowledge, does that mean it doesn’t exist? Or does it simply mean we haven’t the cognitive capacity to put it on firm philosophical footing? My opinion is the latter.

It seems to me that there are only three viable explanations for the problem of knowledge. They are as follows:

1. Knowledge doesn’t exist, therefore we can’t explain it;
2. Knowledge isn’t what we think it is, that’s why we think it’s a problem; and
3. Knowledge exists but we can’t explain it.

The pragmatists, skeptics and relativists represent the beliefs of those who buy either #1, #2 or some combination thereof. The pragmatists tell us, “Yes, knowledge exists. It’s just not what you had in mind.” It’s plausible, sure, but one gets the sense that, just like the compatibilists, the pragmatists are simply changing the subject, pulling the wool over our eyes. We asked for knowledge and they give us a cheap knock-off instead. On the other hand, the skeptics/relativists, in addition to their apparent self-contradiction, simply appear to lack ambition, or perhaps the requisite common sense. That leaves #3.

How could it be that knowledge exists and yet it also be so that we can’t explain it? To this I flip the question: Why should we expect it to be otherwise? If one subscribes to the evolutionary program, it should seem entirely consonant that we cannot make sense of such abstractions as “knowledge”. Evolution has optimised us for procreation, after all. It has not optimised our faculties for philosophical inquiry. Thus it would seem to naturally follow that there are certain realms of knowledge - pardon the pun - to which we are simply not privy. We are, in the jargon, “cognitively closed” to certain matters of Reality. That we are capable of as much abstraction as we are, that we have gleaned what insight we have, is itself a remarkable fact of our existence. A bona fide gift from wherever such gifts come from. But we should not expect it to be all open slather, as it were.
